<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:dcterms="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" class="no-js" lang="en">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
      <meta charset="utf-8" />
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/epub-styles.css" />
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/normalize.css" />
      <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/styles/github.css" /><script src="lib/highlight.pack.js"></script><script>
              hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();
            </script></head>
   <body>
      <section epub:type="appendix">
         <h1>Ideas and outstanding items</h1>
         <p>These are the things I want to look at after finishing mvp.</p>
         <h2>Deep Linking using Emphasis</h2>
         <p>The NYT developed a deep linking library called Emphasis (<a href="https://github.com/NYTimes/Emphasis" label="code">code</a> - <a href="http://open.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/11/emphasis-update-and-source/" label="writeup">writeup</a>) that would allow us to create links to specific areas of our content.
         </p>
         <p>Downside is that it uses jQuery and I'm not certain I want to go through the pain
            in the ass process of converting it to plain JS or ES6 (and if it's even possible)
         </p>
         <p>Still, if we use jQuery for something else (video manipulation?) it may be worth exploring
            both as a sharing tool and as a technology.
         </p>
         <p>One thing it doesn't do is handle mobile well, if at all. How do we make this tool
            work everywhere? <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/pointerevents/" label="Pointer Events">Pointer Events</a>?
         </p>
         <h2>Explore how to add other parts of a book structure</h2>
         <p>Right now we're working with chapters and chapter-like structures. What would it take
            to add parts? Do we need to add them to the schema and let them trickle from there?
            Do we really need them?
         </p>
         <h2>Build Media Queries</h2>
         <p>Particularly if we want to use the same XSLT and CSS for mutliple projects we need
            to be able to tailor the display for different devices and viewports.
         </p>
         <p>Media Queries are the best solution (or are they?)</p>
         <h2>Using XSLT to build navigation</h2>
         <p>The same way we build the table of content should allow us to build navigation within
            the pages of a publication using preceeding-sibling and following-sibling logic
         </p>
         <h2>Create a better way to generate filenames</h2>
         <p>The current way to create filenames doesn't take into account that different <em>section/@type</em> elements have different starting values. Can I make it start from 1 for every @type
            in the document?
         </p>
         <h2>Expand the use cases for this project</h2>
         <p>The original idea was for text and code-heavy content. Is there a case to be made
            for a more expressive vocabulary? I'm thinking of additional elements for navigation
            and content display such as asides and blockquotes
         </p>
         <h2>Explore implementing a serviceworker solution</h2>
         <video height="315" width="560" poster="./images/video1-poster.jpg" controls="controls">
            <source src="./video/serviceworker.mp4" type="video/mp4"></source>
         </video>
         <p>The core of the proposed offline capabilities is a scoped service worker that will
            initially handle the caching of the publication's content. We take advantage of the
            multiple cache capabilitity available with service workers to create caches for individual
            unitts of content (like magazine issues) and to expire them within a certain time
            period (by removing and deleting the cache).
         </p>
         <p>For publications needing to pull data from specific URLs we can special case the requests
            based on different pieces of the URL allowing to create different caches based on
            edition (assuming each edition is stored in its own directory), resource type or even
            the URL we are requesting.
         </p>
         <p>Serviceworkers have another benefit not directly related with offline connections.
            They will give all access to our content a speed boost by eliminating the network
            roundtrip after the content is installed. If the content is in the cache, the resource's
            time to load is only limited by the Hard Drive's speed.
         </p>
         <p>This is what the ServiceWorker code looks like in the demo application:</p><pre><code class="javascript hljs">
// ATHENA DEMO SERVICE WORKER
//
// @author Carlos Araya
// @email carlos.araya@gmail.com
//
// Based on Paul Lewis' Chrome Dev Summit serviceworker.

importScripts('js/serviceworker-cache-polyfill.js');

var CACHE_NAME = 'athena-demo';
var CACHE_VERSION = 8;

self.oninstall = function(event) {

  event.waitUntil(
    caches.open(CACHE_NAME + '-v' + CACHE_VERSION).then(function(cache) {

      return cache.addAll([
        '/athena-framework/',
        '/athena-framework/bower_components/',
        '/athena-framework/css/',
        '/athena-framework/js/',
        '/athena-framework/layouts/',

        '/athena-framework/content/',
        '/athena-framework/index.html',
        '/athena-framework/notes.html',

        'http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000345/ch12.html',
        'http//chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000345/apa.html'
      ]);
    })
  );
};

self.onactivate = function(event) {

  var currentCacheName = CACHE_NAME + '-v' + CACHE_VERSION;
  caches.keys().then(function(cacheNames) {
    return Promise.all(
      cacheNames.map(function(cacheName) {
        if (cacheName.indexOf(CACHE_NAME) == -1) {
          return;
        }

        if (cacheName != currentCacheName) {
          return caches.delete(cacheName);
        }
      })
    );
  });

};

self.onfetch = function(event) {
  var request = event.request;
  var requestURL = new URL(event.request.url);

  event.respondWith(

    // Check the cache for a hit.
    caches.match(request).then(function(response) {

      // If we have a response return it.
      if (response)
        return response;

      // Otherwise fetch it, store and respond.
      return fetch(request).then(function(response) {

        var responseToCache = response.clone();

        caches.open(CACHE_NAME + '-v' + CACHE_VERSION).then(
          function(cache) {
            cache.put(request, responseToCache).catch(function(err) {
              // Likely we got an opaque response which the polyfill
              // can't deal with, so log out a warning.
              console.warn(requestURL + ': ' + err.message);
            });
          });

        return response;
      });

    })
  );
};
    </code></pre><h3>Limitations</h3>
         <p>As powerful as service workers are they also have some drawbacks. They can only be
            served through HTTPS (you cannot install a service worker in a non secure server)
            to prevent <a href="http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Man-in-the-middle_attack" label="man-in-the-middle attacks">man-in-the-middle attacks</a>.
         </p>
         <p>There is limited support for the API (only Chrome Canary and  Firefox Nightly builds
            behind a flag will work.) This will change as the API matures and becomes finalized
            in the WHATWG and/or a recommendation with the W3C.
         </p>
         <p>Even in browsers that support the API the support is not complete. Chrome uses a polyfill
            for elements of the cache API that it does not support natively. This should be fixed
            in upcoming versions of Chrome and Chromium (the open source project Chrome is based
            on.)
         </p>
         <p>We need to be careful with how much data we choose to store in the caches. From what
            I understand the ammount of storage given to offline applications is divided between
            all offline storage types: IndexedDB, Session Storage, Web Workers and ServiceWorkers
            and this amount is not consistent across all browsers.
         </p>
         <p>Furthermore I am not aware of any way to increase this total amount or to specifically
            increase the storage assigned to ServiceWorkers; Jake Archibald mentions this in the
            offline cookbook section on <a href="http://jakearchibald.com/2014/offline-cookbook/#cache-persistence" label="cache persistence">cache persistence</a>.
         </p>
      </section>
   </body>
</html>
